Hello.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
Welcome to this lecture today.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is no attendance book left for today.
This is already the book club for, uh, the questions
NOTE CONF
that we're going to see together.
Uh, in today's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay, on the screen, you can see a quick, uh,
some summary of the content of this week.
NOTE CONF
Um, as I mentioned, uh, uh, yesterday with uh, last
past orthogonality, Cauchy-Schwarz and the triangle inequality yesterday and today
NOTE CONF
we will have a look at matrix spaces and then
similarity will be next week.
NOTE CONF
Um, apologies for yesterday.
I got confused with the lectures that I'm preparing for
NOTE CONF
next Thursday.
So, uh, today we will have a look at columns
NOTE CONF
and row spaces, image and null spaces, and the relation
between the image, the column, uh, and also the rank
NOTE CONF
of the matrix.
Everything that you've seen in your, in your reading for
NOTE CONF
today.
Okay, so this is, uh, the same, uh, QR code
NOTE CONF
for the book club, and, uh, please tell me now
if your book club isn't working because, uh, if if
NOTE CONF
it is for everyone, then, uh, let's, uh, let's start
let's jump straight into it.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, the first question that you will see in
the book club, uh, is based on this matrix here.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's a four by three matrix, of course.
Um, and the question for you is to find the
NOTE CONF
dimension of all the spaces of the matrix.
So this is a warm up exercise.
NOTE CONF
I will give you five minutes to think about how
you would go about and find, uh, the dimension of
NOTE CONF
those spaces.
And then, uh, I will go through the solution of
NOTE CONF
the exercise together with you.
So let me just, uh, change the book club.
NOTE CONF
Okay?
You should see the first, uh the first.
NOTE CONF
Um, the first question now.
This is technically a scoring question, but it was, uh,
NOTE CONF
just the only way I could put four numerical answers
on the slider for you.
NOTE CONF
So just treat it as, um, as, uh, um, as
normal, um, as a normal numerical question.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm going to just hide the answers for some time.
NOTE CONF
I invite you to take your time, discuss, discuss with
your neighbour how you would go about and find the
NOTE CONF
dimensions of those spaces.
I will come around, ask me any question if you
NOTE CONF
have some.
And, uh, I'll be back on the stage in a
NOTE CONF
few minutes.
As a hint for you to sort of go about
NOTE CONF
this exercise.
Of course.
NOTE CONF
Try to remind yourself of what those spaces are, how
they are defined.
NOTE CONF
And then from there you really have two ways.
You can either apply the definition, find out what the
NOTE CONF
spaces, and then find the dimension of the space like
you used to.
NOTE CONF
Or if you think the space has any particular property
that you remember, you can apply other results there.
NOTE CONF
Um, we will see both both methods later.
Okay, I will leave the question active for now and
NOTE CONF
you can still answer it.
I'm not going to show the answer yet.
NOTE CONF
Let's just go through the definition of this four spaces
very quickly together just to fix the ideas.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Let's, uh, matrix let's take it to be square here,
NOTE CONF
but it doesn't matter.
The same, uh, works with non-square matrices.
NOTE CONF
The column space is the subspace of N, and that
is created by the span of the columns of the
NOTE CONF
matrix.
And you won't be surprised to know that the row
NOTE CONF
space is the subspace spanned by the rows of the
matrix.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What about the image and the null space?
NOTE CONF
Which are the the other two?
The image space is the set of all vectors that
NOTE CONF
can be written by applying the matrix multiplication to any
vector in the appropriate space.
NOTE CONF
So if I can write x as some vector v
multiplied on the left by the matrix A, then x
NOTE CONF
will be an element of the image.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And uh, what is the null space?
Does anyone want to come forward with that?
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yes yes, that's exactly right.
NOTE CONF
The formalism for that is written there.
But it's essentially what he just said.
NOTE CONF
It's the, uh, it's the set of all vectors that
are mapped to zero by applying a.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we now have, uh, uh, lay down the definitions
NOTE CONF
of what we are trying to calculate the dimension of.
Let's start with the column space.
NOTE CONF
The column space.
Let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a peek at the solutions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Most of you believe that the column space has dimensions
either 2 or 3.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I'm just going to hide the rest for the for
NOTE CONF
the time.
For the time being.
NOTE CONF
And both are reasonable answers.
And two is actually the correct one.
NOTE CONF
It would be three because you have three columns.
But uh, now the third column is the sum of
NOTE CONF
the previous two hopefully.
Yes, yes.
NOTE CONF
I didn't make, um, a calculation over there.
So, um, because, uh, because the third column is, uh,
NOTE CONF
linearly dependent on the first two.
Now the dimension of the column space is equal to
NOTE CONF
the span of the first two columns, which are linearly
independent.
NOTE CONF
Of course, you can determine that the first two are
linearly independent by just looking at the at the last.
NOTE CONF
At the last component.
There's no way these two columns are linearly dependent.
NOTE CONF
And so that will be the span of the first
two columns dimension equal to two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, we just essentially, um, answer the question by using
NOTE CONF
the definition of the space.
Now, we could do the same thing with the row
NOTE CONF
space.
So this this should be row.
NOTE CONF
Um, the row space is just the span of the
rows, which I have written vertically, just for a matter
NOTE CONF
of space.
Uh, obviously this this, uh, vectors cannot be linearly independent
NOTE CONF
for a very obvious reason.
Can you can anyone come up with why they can't
NOTE CONF
be independent without doing any calculations?
Perfect is multiplied by minus one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That.
NOTE CONF
Yes, that.
That's that's exactly what I was after.
NOTE CONF
That's a very simple calculation.
And fairly obvious.
NOTE CONF
Yes, but also there's four vectors in three components.
And so three for vectors in R3 will never be
NOTE CONF
linearly independent.
Uh okay.
NOTE CONF
So there's two way we can approach this.
We can calculate the number of linearly independent vectors, which
NOTE CONF
essentially means that, uh, we, we check for, for linear
independence.
NOTE CONF
We do some calculations and we find out how many
are linearly independent in there.
NOTE CONF
Or we can use one result that was in your
reading, uh, particularly lemma 5.4.2, which says that if A
NOTE CONF
is put into a row echelon form, then the basis
of the row space will be the rows of the
NOTE CONF
reduced row echelon matrix that are non-zero.
And this involves a slightly different kind of calculations.
NOTE CONF
But if you go ahead and try to do that,
I wonder, is it for a time saving measures?
NOTE CONF
Then we get the dimension of the row space is
also equal to three.
NOTE CONF
There's another way of doing it because we know, uh,
the dimension of the of the column space already, but
NOTE CONF
we will cross that bridge when we get there.
Okay, next up, the image space.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, I'm going to, uh, lay down this claim
that the column space of A is equal to the
NOTE CONF
image space of A.
And this might be to some surprise for some of
NOTE CONF
you, but I'm not going to prove it here.
And the reason is that I do the proof in
NOTE CONF
one of the videos for the reading quiz, so you
can access the proof in the video.
NOTE CONF
It's going to me explaining it to you just online
from Monday.
NOTE CONF
So just keep this in the in the back pocket.
And uh, obviously because those two, um, those two vector
NOTE CONF
spaces are the same space, then they have a, they
have the same dimension.
NOTE CONF
There's nothing else.
There's nothing else to say.
NOTE CONF
Um, and finally, the null space.
Uh, how do we find the null space?
NOTE CONF
Well, we can just go, um, straightforward.
We solve the system.
NOTE CONF
Axe equals zero, and this will return.
All the solutions of the system will be all the
NOTE CONF
vectors in the null space.
And depending how many parameters we will need to express
NOTE CONF
the solutions, uh, we will get the dimension of the
null space.
NOTE CONF
That is very similar to an exercise we did yesterday,
the one where I asked how many, um, how many
NOTE CONF
parameters I need to write down orthogonal and orthogonal vectors
to a given set, and this runs much, much along
NOTE CONF
the same intuition.
Uh, or we can we can use another result that
NOTE CONF
you have, uh, seen in the readings, which is the
rank nullity theorem, which says that the rank of A
NOTE CONF
is, uh, plus the dimension of the null space of
A is equal to n and n.
NOTE CONF
Here will be the numbers of columns, and the rank
of a was defined a very long time ago as
NOTE CONF
the number of rows in the reduced row echelon form
that had a one pivot, uh, a nontrivial people in
NOTE CONF
the in the reduced row echelon form.
And, uh, but you've seen in the reading that we
NOTE CONF
can rewrite the rank of the matrix as the dimension
of the column space.
NOTE CONF
So essentially there's a few equivalent way we can express
the rank nullity theorem.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to spoil too much because one of
the next exercises will be exactly about this, but essentially
NOTE CONF
we can reread this as the dimension of the column
space of A plus.
NOTE CONF
The dimension of the null space of A is equal
to n, and now we have calculated the dimension of
NOTE CONF
the column space.
We know what n is.
NOTE CONF
We can just bring, um, the everything to the right
hand side, and we find that the dimension of the
NOTE CONF
null, a, uh, is a zero dimensional subspace, and so
null A will be just the zero vector, because the
NOTE CONF
set made up by the zero vector is the only
vector space of dimension zero.
NOTE CONF
And by the way, I want to chip in to
a question that I've seen on Piazza being asked, uh,
NOTE CONF
this morning, actually, I think, um, which were, which was
about, uh, the vector zero specifically.
NOTE CONF
And the question was, is the vector zero, uh, orthogonal
to everything or not or orthogonal to anything.
NOTE CONF
And the answer to the question is it doesn't really
matter.
NOTE CONF
The vector zero is just the vector zero.
If you take this kind of product with anything, you
NOTE CONF
get zero.
But that is a very weird scalar product because one
NOTE CONF
vector is zero.
And so you can either decide, okay, we consider it
NOTE CONF
orthogonal to everything or not orthogonal to anything, and it
doesn't really matter.
NOTE CONF
The reason we say that it's not orthogonal to anything
in this course, and this is the sort of the
NOTE CONF
way that we decided to approach this issue in this
course, is that it's more convenient to consider it that
NOTE CONF
way for talking about orthogonal basis, because otherwise orthogonal basis
would be defined up to the inclusion of the vector
NOTE CONF
zero, which really doesn't do any favour to anyone.
You have a base, you create the same base with
NOTE CONF
the vector zero, which adds nothing, and that is still
a base.
NOTE CONF
If you discard that option, then you can assume that
the base is, uh, um, is uniquely defined, um, by
NOTE CONF
its non-zero vectors.
So that is why, um, that is why we, we
NOTE CONF
have made this decision.
But the complete answer is it doesn't really matter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is for question one.
NOTE CONF
Uh, do you have any questions?
No.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
In that case, um, the one that I just foreshadowed
NOTE CONF
here, you have some statements which are all taken from
the rank nullity theorem.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I would like you to choose those that
are correct.
NOTE CONF
They are equivalent version of stating the same thing, which
is the rank nullity theorem, which we just touched upon.
NOTE CONF
Um, just a minute ago.
This question I will only give you a couple of
NOTE CONF
minutes because it should be fairly quick to answer.
Okay, I'll give you 30 more seconds to finish.
NOTE CONF
In the meantime, hopefully I changed my settings so that
the display won't go blank every time.
NOTE CONF
Fingers crossed it works.
Okay, I see 60 answers, uh, that have come in.
NOTE CONF
Can we reach 80 before we reveal?
Okay, we're at 72.
NOTE CONF
Submit your vote now.
Okay, so, uh, broadly, you, um, you just have decided
NOTE CONF
that one, three and four and there is actually, um,
a bit of a conflict on number five.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look at the components of this, uh,
of this of this question.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This question hinges on two, uh, equivalences that we have
NOTE CONF
discussed briefly in the previous question, which is that the
rank was defined in terms of the pivot of the
NOTE CONF
row echelon matrix, but it's actually also equal to the
dimension of the column of A, and also the unproven
NOTE CONF
things that I claimed before.
The one that you will find in the reading video
NOTE CONF
is that the image of A is actually equal to
the column space of A.
NOTE CONF
So what is the standard way of uh, uh, giving
the rank the rank nullity theorem?
NOTE CONF
That would be number four.
And now how can we do the substitution when we
NOTE CONF
know that the rank of a is also the dimension
of the column of A?
NOTE CONF
So one is also true.
And we also know that from here we can go
NOTE CONF
down to this one here, because the dimension of the
image of A will be equal to the dimension of
NOTE CONF
the column of A, because they are the same space.
Now what about the dimension of the null space plus
NOTE CONF
the dimension of the row space?
Anyone has any idea.
NOTE CONF
Who only be true with the row space and the
column space.
NOTE CONF
Have the same.
The same dimension.
NOTE CONF
Is that true?
If you think it's true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Down your hands.
NOTE CONF
Raise your hands if you think it's false.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That content of the rank theorem that says the rank
can be expressed is equal to n, and that would
NOTE CONF
be the dimension of the column space and the dimension
of the row space.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, this is just the the theoretical sum up, uh,
NOTE CONF
that we've, we've just used.
This was the original definition of the rank.
NOTE CONF
And This is the wrong theorem.
Uh, let our let a be a matrix.
NOTE CONF
Then the dimension of the column is equal to the
dimension of the row, which is equal to the rank
NOTE CONF
which we normally called.
Ah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So because of this equality also five would be one
NOTE CONF
acceptable way of reframing the rank nullity theory.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now I will step down from the from the
stage for 5 to 10 minutes because we have a
NOTE CONF
PhD student here, Chiara, who's working to enhance the mathematic
teaching in the school.
NOTE CONF
And she would like your support in her research.
So I'll let her speak and I'll see you again
NOTE CONF
in ten minutes or so.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Can you hear me?
I'm Chiara and I'm a PhD student And I would
NOTE CONF
like to ask you to take part to this survey.
The aim is to investigate the previous experience and attitude
NOTE CONF
to computer programming, and the population is a first year
student of the School of Mathematics.
NOTE CONF
So there is a question about this, but if you
would like to take part.
NOTE CONF
Please scan the QR code or have access to the
link.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is we would like to ask you
to take part of this survey now.
NOTE CONF
So it will take 5 or 10 minutes.
So please do it now so we can collect the
NOTE CONF
the answers.
And, uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
If you have other questions please ask me.
But I think this is enough.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone have any questions for cannon yet?
On this?
NOTE CONF
You can, but there is a question.
Um, and you can choose if you are a as
NOTE CONF
a school of mathematics student.
So you can also answer all the questions.
NOTE CONF
But we will, um, take only the data of the
as the School of Mathematics student so we could focus
NOTE CONF
on this kind of students.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, uh, perhaps to make something, uh, here, this is
NOTE CONF
optional.
You don't have to do it.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, the research is done.
Like, the university is doing some interesting data.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, we would appreciate if you.
Were able to support and is voluntary and anonymous, so
NOTE CONF
you don't have to write down your email or other
data.
NOTE CONF
So, um, all the data collected are anonymous.
And you can find also all the information about how
NOTE CONF
we will collect the data and other, uh, info, um,
in the first page of the, of the survey.
NOTE CONF
So before, um, give your consent to participate.
Okay, just for a quick check to know when to
NOTE CONF
restart.
Can you raise your hand if you have finished?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
No worries.
NOTE CONF
Take your time.
Okay, so Carter will probably stay here at the end
NOTE CONF
of the lecture during the break.
So if you have any questions, you can also ask
NOTE CONF
her at the end.
Uh, now I would like to continue if that's okay.
NOTE CONF
If you.
Starting in one, 1 or 2 more minutes, there's people
NOTE CONF
still finishing.
apparently.
NOTE CONF
If you're still working on it, can you raise your
hands?
NOTE CONF
Two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay so back to linear algebra.
We go.
NOTE CONF
And question three.
Now back to the book club.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to put on the QR code.
So if you've logged out by scanning the other one
NOTE CONF
we can go back.
Uh this one is something that I liked yesterday.
NOTE CONF
Yesterday was a trial.
And today we will do this again.
NOTE CONF
It's a reconstruct a proof exercise.
And this time, the proof that I've chosen is this
NOTE CONF
one here it's a let A and B be two
matrices.
NOTE CONF
If you can go from A to B by performing
a series of elementary row operations, then you can show
NOTE CONF
that the row space of the two matrices is the
same.
NOTE CONF
And this works exactly as yesterday.
You will log in into work and you will see
NOTE CONF
a series of logical statements, and your job is to
put them into the right order, hopefully without referencing the
NOTE CONF
proof from the book, because that would be a little
bit too easy.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, I'll give you a couple of minutes and
then we will work through the proof, um, together as
NOTE CONF
usual.
Is the question working for anyone?
NOTE CONF
No.
Oh, let's have a look, then.
NOTE CONF
Oh, I simply didn't change it.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
I hear very silent classroom, as always.
NOTE CONF
You're very welcome to discuss with people next to you
on mathematical issues.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's uh.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
I see only 11, so I'll give you a couple
more minutes.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we've had a few more coming in.
A few more seconds if you're just about to submit
NOTE CONF
the answer.
Otherwise, let's start to have a look at the proof.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, this is a typical way that we do proofs
NOTE CONF
in mathematics.
The general statement is quite complicated because there are many
NOTE CONF
ways to move from one matrix to the other using
elementary row column, and so this method is called from
NOTE CONF
Latin divided tempora, which means split up in dominate.
And so if we can split up the proof into
NOTE CONF
several small cases that we can check individually, then we
have completed the proof.
NOTE CONF
And this is exactly what we what we want to
do here.
NOTE CONF
We can pass from one matrix to the other using
elementary row operations in many times, but all of them
NOTE CONF
are composition or successive applications of three main basic operations.
And so if we check that each operation preserves the
NOTE CONF
the row space, then no matter how many or how
varied the application of these three steps is, then we
NOTE CONF
will preserve the row space throughout the whole procedure.
And so the final matrix will have the same row
NOTE CONF
space as the starting one.
Okay, so what are the three cases?
NOTE CONF
Well, as usual, uh.
Well, okay.
NOTE CONF
Yes, we can check all the allowed types of operations
separately.
NOTE CONF
As usual, proofs are not, uh, exactly, uh, perfect in
terms of the, um, in terms of the necessary ordering
NOTE CONF
of the steps, in particular, the order in which we
check the row operation, uh, doesn't matter.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and so we have a few options that were
all exactly correct.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
Um, two of these, uh, two of these, uh, uh,
NOTE CONF
row operations are very easy to check.
The last one is a little bit more complicated, so
NOTE CONF
let's do the two.
Easy one first.
NOTE CONF
First of all, we can swap the rows.
Uh, but that's, that's, uh, to no hurt because, uh,
NOTE CONF
swapping the vectors that generate a span, uh, a span
of the rows is how the row space is defined.
NOTE CONF
swapping the vectors in the span doesn't change the span,
so we're all good.
NOTE CONF
And the same is true if we multiply one of
the vectors that create the span by a constant, we
NOTE CONF
don't change the span.
That's because we can.
NOTE CONF
Just the span of any set of vectors is equal
to the span of the rescaled vectors.
NOTE CONF
However, we want to rescale them.
So just rescaling one row here doesn't change the span
NOTE CONF
and thus doesn't change the row space.
Okay, and now for the meaty part of the of
NOTE CONF
the of the proof.
The last allowed row operation is an operation that adds
NOTE CONF
a multiple of a row to a different one.
And let's let's suppose that these are the rows of
NOTE CONF
the matrix, and p and q will be obviously the
ones that interact with each other.
NOTE CONF
Oh, whoops.
Wrong keyboard.
NOTE CONF
Um, And.
And here we apply theorem 5.1.1 which essentially does this
NOTE CONF
for us.
So this is another example that I've chosen this this
NOTE CONF
proof for.
The hard part of this proof is actually the proof
NOTE CONF
of something else.
So in mathematics we recycle previous results all the time
NOTE CONF
if we can, if you can um, if you can
take a difficult concept, divide it up and then uh,
NOTE CONF
and then reduce it to very simple cases or cases
that we have already proven.
NOTE CONF
That's the, that's the, the best practice really.
So um, because we've proven, uh, theorem 5.1.1, um, this
NOTE CONF
is actually, uh, not a meaty part after all.
Or at least it was when we proved theorem 5.1.1.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, my two takeaways from this proof is try
to split up and conquer and split up in a
NOTE CONF
way that you can reuse and recycle previous results.
Okay, so that was the the spirit of this proof.
NOTE CONF
And well, then we can conclude we put everything together.
We say, uh, any operation that we do, uh, doesn't
NOTE CONF
change the row space.
Um, moving to reduce row echelon is just a succession
NOTE CONF
of consecutive application of row operation.
But the row space is, uh, is preserved at every
NOTE CONF
step.
And thus, if we move from A to it's reduced
NOTE CONF
row echelon form by elementary row operations, we preserve the
row space.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I invite you to take your time and look
NOTE CONF
out for, uh, these types of reasoning, these type of
techniques in the proofs that you encounter in your reading.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Do you have any questions about this proof, the methods,
NOTE CONF
uh, anything unclear?
Okay, let's turn to the last exercise.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, I'd like to experiment a little bit with
these exercises.
NOTE CONF
And so this is a standard exercise.
It's a true or false for several statements, but I've
NOTE CONF
mixed the difficulty of the statements quite a bit.
This time.
NOTE CONF
There are two statements that are simple or fairly simple.
And there are two statements that are hard or very
NOTE CONF
hard for two very different reasons.
And we won't only go through the statements themselves, we
NOTE CONF
will also comment why they are hard and how to
to tackle them, um, if they ever come up in
NOTE CONF
the future.
So I believe that this is these are the statements
NOTE CONF
you will see a triple exclamation mark on two and
four.
NOTE CONF
Those are the hard ones.
If you feel confident about the simple ones, you can
NOTE CONF
just skip to them.
If you're not confident and you just want the solution,
NOTE CONF
you can do the easy one If you want to
do both, you can.
NOTE CONF
You can choose that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I will need at least 8 or 9 minutes
to discuss this.
NOTE CONF
So you have 2 to 3 minutes to think about
this.
NOTE CONF
Okay for this particular exercise.
I'm not, uh, too interested in exactly which statement you
NOTE CONF
get wrong or right.
The club is just an excuse to have you think
NOTE CONF
about it individually or with your colleagues for some time.
So let's go through the first one, which was not
NOTE CONF
one of the hard one.
And, uh, the reason this is, uh, one of the
NOTE CONF
easy one is that it relies heavily on results that
you have been given.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can apply a couple of results that you've seen
NOTE CONF
in the reading, and you reach the conclusion that this
statement is indeed true.
NOTE CONF
And it's not straightforward.
So it's not an easy exercise, but you don't have
NOTE CONF
to input much of your own to solve it.
So let's see how we do it.
NOTE CONF
Uh, if A is an invertible matrix, what does it
mean?
NOTE CONF
Well, it means that the rank of the matrix, among
other things, it means several things.
NOTE CONF
It means that the determinant is non-zero.
It means that all the eigenvalues are non-zero.
NOTE CONF
It means a lot of things.
But among other things, it means that the, uh, that
NOTE CONF
A is invertible, and so the rank is equal to
n.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, but now, uh, because the rank is equal to
NOTE CONF
n, that is also equal to the dimension of the
row space and the column space which have the same
NOTE CONF
dimensions.
Now, in principle, they don't need to be the same
NOTE CONF
space.
But in this particular case, if we have two n
NOTE CONF
dimensional spaces in our n, they're both equal to or
n themselves.
NOTE CONF
There are no subspaces of of dimension n in r
n other than r n itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so for this reason, a column and row of
NOTE CONF
A for an invertible matrix are both equal to r
n, and therefore they are the same space because they're
NOTE CONF
equal to the same vector space.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
As you can see, not an easy problem because there's
a few things to order around and make falling to
NOTE CONF
the right, uh, into the right place.
But your input is just in the reordering.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now compare that to statement two.
NOTE CONF
Now, statement two is a very hard question because instead
your input here needs to be much more substantial.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is a matrix that it's the not the
NOTE CONF
zero matrix but its square matrix is.
So if we multiply a with itself we get the
NOTE CONF
identically zero matrix.
And we want to show that its rung is smaller
NOTE CONF
or equal than n over half.
And essentially what this exercise requires you is to build
NOTE CONF
new knowledge from what you already know entirely new knowledge.
And this is ultimately the scope of this course and
NOTE CONF
the scope of your degree.
So it makes sense that this may come as quite
NOTE CONF
a bit at the moment, but hopefully by the end
of the course and more generally by the end of
NOTE CONF
your degree, this is the sort of things that you
will grow familiar with.
NOTE CONF
So why do I say this is new knowledge?
Because I don't think we've spoken about how potent matrices
NOTE CONF
any potent matrix is.
Just a it's just the name that mathematicians have given
NOTE CONF
to a matrix that have this property here if if
it's nonzero but one of its power is the zero
NOTE CONF
matrix, then we call it potent.
And so what.
NOTE CONF
Exercises.
What this exercise require is essentially prove a theorem for
NOTE CONF
a potent matrix, which is something that we haven't seen.
And the same is true and we will go about
NOTE CONF
and prove it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
How do we do this?
Uh, well, um, we want to show that.
NOTE CONF
Let me put everything on the screen.
We want to show that the image of the matrix
NOTE CONF
A is a subset of the null space of A.
That is the first step, and it will become clear
NOTE CONF
in the next slide why we do that.
How do we prove it?
NOTE CONF
Well because a squared is equal to zero.
Then if you apply the matrix a square to any
NOTE CONF
vectors we get the vector zero because that is the
the matrix zero.
NOTE CONF
But now a squared we can collect the terms differently.
And we get uh a of axe equals zero.
NOTE CONF
And now note that axe is just the way we
write the generic element of the image space.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The image space is the set of all vectors that
NOTE CONF
can be written in exactly this form for any vectors
x in RN.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So v.
NOTE CONF
Here is a vector of the image.
But now if I transform the vector of the image
NOTE CONF
with a if get maps to zero, so that vector
is also in the null space.
NOTE CONF
So any vector that's in the image is also in
the null, which means that the image is a subset
NOTE CONF
of the null space.
Exactly what what what we wanted to do.
NOTE CONF
And why is that useful?
Well, this is a sort of pigeonhole principle.
NOTE CONF
If you have a if you've ever heard about that.
And if I have a subspace of another space, the
NOTE CONF
dimension of the space that is contained in the other
cannot be bigger than the dimension of the space that
NOTE CONF
contains it.
There's not enough space in the in the vector space
NOTE CONF
to contain a larger subspace.
Subspace with more with a greater dimension.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And now for the final, uh, for the final step,
NOTE CONF
let's go in with the with the rank nullity theorem.
Now we have the dimension of the image is smaller
NOTE CONF
than the dimension of the null, but the sum of
the two is n.
NOTE CONF
And so if you think about it for more than
a couple of seconds, this one needs to be smaller
NOTE CONF
than n halves, because if this was larger than and
halves, this is also larger than enhanced.
NOTE CONF
And then they can be equal to n okay.
So this is the type of uh uh possibly the
NOTE CONF
hardest type of exercises that we can come up with,
giving you something that you can theoretically construct from what
NOTE CONF
you know, but it takes some trial and error or
being incredibly used to work with these types of objects.
NOTE CONF
So no worries if you haven't seen how to solve
this exercise.
NOTE CONF
That's normal.
I just wanted to show you what type of reasoning
NOTE CONF
goes into solving an exercise that requires you a lot
of input from your part.
NOTE CONF
Okay, now, because we've done a hard exercise, let's move
to Uh.
NOTE CONF
Oh, yeah.
And this is just the just what we just what
NOTE CONF
we have proven.
And this is actually, uh, something that implies this one.
NOTE CONF
So this is an even stronger version of this that
we that we don't, uh, that we don't prove.
NOTE CONF
If a is a potent matrix, all of its eigenvalues
are zero.
NOTE CONF
And you can you can get our result from this
one.
NOTE CONF
You can try it in your own time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now statement three we revert back to what we are
familiar with.
NOTE CONF
I didn't want to scare you too much.
And this is a pretty straightforward application of the rank
NOTE CONF
nullity theorem, because here essentially what I'm giving you is,
uh, the dimension of the null space.
NOTE CONF
You have the dimension of the matrix.
And I'm asking you the dimension of the column, which
NOTE CONF
is again using that equivalency with the rank.
And then you can apply the rank nullity theorem.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and then you get, uh, that the dimension of
the column space was the rank.
NOTE CONF
And so it was equal to three and not to
two, as I claimed.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's go back to the standard way of doing
NOTE CONF
things here.
And finally statement four and I marked this as difficult.
NOTE CONF
And maybe some of you found it extremely difficult.
And some of you find it extremely easy.
NOTE CONF
And the reason why this exercise is difficult is, uh,
that, uh, it's an easy exercise in disguise.
NOTE CONF
Because.
Why?
NOTE CONF
Well, because I set a trap for it.
Um, I put a very hard, a very hard hypothesis
NOTE CONF
to work with ahead of a statement that is actually
very easy.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That statement is once again related to the rank nullity
NOTE CONF
theorem, uh, in a very straightforward way.
And the rank nullity theorem works for any matrix.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter if a t a is equal to
in.
NOTE CONF
If it works for any matrix, then it will work
also for the matrices that have this, uh uh, this
NOTE CONF
property here.
And so how do we solve this exercise?
NOTE CONF
Well, it's actually, uh, pretty much a one liner.
Uh, we can just use, uh, sorry.
NOTE CONF
It said the rank nullity theorem and the rank theorem.
We can just use the rank theorem, stating that the
NOTE CONF
dimension of the column is equal to the dimension of
the rows, and this should be zero, not minus one
NOTE CONF
as a claiming.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So two types of difficulty we've seen here one genuine
difficulty and then one uh, one trap.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and the takeaway from this exercise is it's true
that proofs works from left to right, but don't stop
NOTE CONF
on the left, okay?
Because sometimes the left is hard and the right is
NOTE CONF
easy and you waste your time.
Start decomposing.
NOTE CONF
This, uh, when it's actually pretty simple.
Okay, time is up.
NOTE CONF
Lecture is over.
I'll see you next week for the workshops and the
NOTE CONF
lectures.
Thank you for coming.
NOTE CONF